---
date: 2021-04-03T09:03:37Z
hero_image: "/content/images/sarah-dorweiler-9Z1KRIfpBTM-unsplash.jpg"
tags: []
author: ''
title: Project planning and roadmaps

---
Currently, I'm doing a project in which I've "accidentally" been tasked with planning out the features. I find this quite hard to do and I'm not sure what the right way is if there is such a thing at all. It seems like a good topic to write about, so let's explore it a bit out loud. 

When someone pitches a job or idea to you they often ask you to quote stuff. When it's a bit larger than the average marketing site you might just decide to write something or plan it a bit more rigorously. So you start up a Trello or Notion template, a more user-focused productboard, or even try to do it the "right" way by starting up a full-blown Jira board. You plan out the issues and tasks you need to do, which often ends up being a really long and messy list of entities of different sizes. When you notice this, you start asking yourself the question: Shall I write down more organizationally oriented features, issues, or tasks that collaborators understand? Or do I take a more technical perspective and write down views, components, interfaces, actions, down to the individual functions so that people understand the technological layers and concerns a bit better? Soon you realize this is a near-impossible feat, and decide to just wing it. Writing down everything and structuring it in a proper way takes more time than actually building it and see where that takes you. Especially when working alone you hit the next thing on the list in a very intuitive way without planning at all. You just need to put the work in, and at a certain point, the work is done.  So when writing a quote you put your finger in the air, guess some random number within a certain range, and jot it down. You've got wonderful time logging software, so you know exactly how little you earned later on. 

On the other hand, you have your education in information science, the stuff you read, and your previous experience. You often read about the big methodologies for organizing projects, like the dichotomy between waterfall and agile methodologies. The "big design up front" waterfall methodology always yields unhappiness because it tries to control the unknown. Yet you know that the agile methodology always ends up with the wonderful anecdote "let's design in code", which is short for let the developer spend time on product management and UI / UX design in a tool that is quite inefficient for those jobs. You also get confronted with the large organizational gap between business needs and technological implementation. Both large methodologies seem terrible and as a true academic you've learned to say "it depends" to every question and choice you have to make. The concepts you've learned gnaw at you and you don't want to waste time building something nobody will appreciate. You need to know who your user is, what they want to do and how they achieve value by those things. If you write well, you even capture some context, like where or when they want to do those things. The various formats of a user story seem like a nice template to capture your "features".  Yet you also know that deploying a format, or a theory in general, is the prefect way to make a messy situation even worse.

You're locked. You don't know what to do anymore. The 